Add GPU DRA User Guide (#1008)
kubevirt/user-guide: docs/compute/dra_gpu.md

**FEATURE STATE:** v1.9.0: Beta

KubeVirt can attach GPUs to virtual machines through Kubernetes [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/).
With DRA, a GPU is requested through the Kubernetes `ResourceClaim` API, allocated by an external GPU DRA driver, and attached to the VM through `spec.resourceClaims` and `spec.domain.devices.gpus`.

This is an alternative to the device-plugin flow documented in [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md).
With DRA, you do not need to allowlist GPUs in `permittedHostDevices`. Instead, the DRA driver publishes `ResourceSlice` objects and KubeVirt reads device metadata from files mounted into virt-launcher.

!!! Note
    Throughout this guide, **Container Device Interface (CDI)** refers to the Kubernetes mechanism that DRA drivers use to inject device nodes into virt-launcher pods — not [Containerized Data Importer](../storage/containerized_data_importer.md), which KubeVirt uses for disk import workflows.

`GPUsWithDRA` feature gate is in Beta and is enabled by default starting in v1.9.0. You do not need to set them for standard operation.

> See [Activating feature gates](../cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates.md) to enable it on earlier releases or to disable it.

Reviewer: nit: only supported previous release is 1.8

## Prerequisites

- **GPU DRA driver.** Install a compatible external GPU DRA driver in the cluster.

    This guide documents the [NVIDIA k8s-dra-driver-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu) for production clusters. 

>     The driver must publish [DRA device metadata (KEP-5304)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/5304-dra-attributes-downward-api) — device attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` — in JSON files mounted into virt-launcher. KubeVirt reads these files to build the libvirt domain XML for the GPU. This is separate from the VFIO device nodes that CDI mounts at runtime: CDI delivers the `/dev/vfio` handles; the metadata file identifies which PCI device to attach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The driver must publish [DRA device metadata (KEP-5304)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/5304-dra-attributes-downward-api) — device attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` — in JSON files mounted into virt-launcher. KubeVirt reads these files to build the libvirt domain XML for the GPU. This is separate from the VFIO device nodes that CDI mounts at runtime: CDI delivers the `/dev/vfio/*` device nodes; the metadata file identifies which PCI device to attach.
```

>     The driver must publish [DRA device metadata (KEP-5304)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/5304-dra-attributes-downward-api) — device attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` — in JSON files mounted into virt-launcher. KubeVirt reads these files to build the libvirt domain XML for the GPU. This is separate from the VFIO device nodes that CDI mounts at runtime: CDI delivers the `/dev/vfio/*` device nodes; the metadata file identifies which PCI device to attach.

Reviewer: For driver authors, the docs for publishing dra device attributes for metadata are here: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-resources/access-dra-device-metadata/

- **Host preparation for passthrough GPUs.** For passthrough allocations, GPU nodes must meet the usual PCI passthrough requirements (IOMMU enabled, `vfio-pci` available). See [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md#host-preparation-for-pci-passthrough).

## Overview

The high-level workflow is:

1. Install a GPU DRA driver on the cluster.
2. Create a `ResourceClaimTemplate` that requests a GPU from the driver.
3. Create a VMI that references the claim and maps it to `spec.domain.devices.gpus`.

##  Installing the DRA GPU driver

### DRA driver for NVIDIA GPUs

Install the [dra-driver-nvidia-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu). 

For installation details, see the [installation guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/install/). 

> For KubeVirt VFIO GPU passthrough, see the [KubeVirt VFIO GPU passthrough guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/guides/kubevirt-vfio-gpu-passthrough/).

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
For enabling GPU passthrough support in the DRA driver, see the [KubeVirt VFIO GPU passthrough guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/guides/kubevirt-vfio-gpu-passthrough/).
```

  name: vm-dra-gpu
  labels:
    app: vm-dra-gpu-test
spec:
  resourceClaims:
  - name: dra-gpu-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: dra-gpu-claim-template
  domain:
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 128Mi
    cpu:
      cores: 1
    devices:
      disks:
      - name: containerdisk
        disk:
          bus: virtio
      interfaces:
      - name: default
        masquerade: {}
      gpus:
      - name: gpu0
        claimName: dra-gpu-claim
        requestName: dra-gpu
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  volumes:
  - name: containerdisk
    containerDisk:
      image: quay.io/kubevirt/cirros-container-disk-demo:latest
```

!!! Note
    **These fields must reference each other:**

    - `spec.resourceClaims[].resourceClaimTemplateName` must match the `metadata.name` of the `ResourceClaimTemplate` created in step 2 (`dra-gpu-claim-template` in this example).
    - `spec.domain.devices.gpus[].claimName` must match `spec.resourceClaims[].name` for the claim that backs the device   (`dra-gpu-claim` in this example).
    - `spec.domain.devices.gpus[].requestName` must match the request `name` defined in the `ResourceClaimTemplate` (`dra-gpu` in this example).

> When the VMI starts, virt-launcher uses the metadata file for attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` and the CDI-mounted `/dev/vfio` nodes to configure GPU passthrough in the libvirt domain XML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the VMI starts, virt-launcher uses the metadata file for attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` and the CDI-mounted `/dev/vfio/*` device nodes to configure GPU passthrough in the libvirt domain XML.
```

This is an alternative to the device-plugin flow documented in [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md).
With DRA, you do not need to allowlist GPUs in `permittedHostDevices`. Instead, the DRA driver publishes `ResourceSlice` objects and KubeVirt reads device metadata from files mounted into virt-launcher.

!!! Note
    Throughout this guide, **Container Device Interface (CDI)** refers to the Kubernetes mechanism that DRA drivers use to inject device nodes into virt-launcher pods — not [Containerized Data Importer](../storage/containerized_data_importer.md), which KubeVirt uses for disk import workflows.

`GPUsWithDRA` feature gate is in Beta and is enabled by default starting in v1.9.0. You do not need to set them for standard operation.

See [Activating feature gates](../cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates.md) to enable it on earlier releases or to disable it.

## Prerequisites

- **GPU DRA driver.** Install a compatible external GPU DRA driver in the cluster.

    This guide documents the [NVIDIA k8s-dra-driver-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu) for production clusters. 
    

>     See the [KubeVirt VFIO GPU passthrough guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/guides/kubevirt-vfio-gpu-passthrough/) for driver-specific setup details.

Reviewer 3: This link 404s

>     The driver must publish [DRA device metadata (KEP-5304)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/5304-dra-attributes-downward-api) — device attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` — in JSON files mounted into virt-launcher. KubeVirt reads these files to build the libvirt domain XML for the GPU. This is separate from the VFIO device nodes that CDI mounts at runtime: CDI delivers the `/dev/vfio` handles; the metadata file identifies which PCI device to attach.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The driver must publish [DRA device metadata (KEP-5304)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/5304-dra-attributes-downward-api) — device attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` — in JSON files mounted into virt-launcher. KubeVirt reads these files to build the libvirt domain XML for the GPU. This is separate from the VFIO device nodes that the Container Device Interface (CDI) mounts at runtime: CDI delivers the `/dev/vfio` handles; the metadata file identifies which PCI device to attach.
```
I know we called it out in the admonition earlier but I think it's good to be explicit here as well.

- **Host preparation for passthrough GPUs.** For passthrough allocations, GPU nodes must meet the usual PCI passthrough requirements (IOMMU enabled, `vfio-pci` available). See [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md#host-preparation-for-pci-passthrough).

## Overview

The high-level workflow is:

1. Install a GPU DRA driver on the cluster.
2. Create a `ResourceClaimTemplate` that requests a GPU from the driver.
3. Create a VMI that references the claim and maps it to `spec.domain.devices.gpus`.

##  Installing the DRA GPU driver

### DRA driver for NVIDIA GPUs

Install the [dra-driver-nvidia-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu). For installation details, see the [installation guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/install/). 

> For KubeVirt VFIO GPU passthrough, see the [KubeVirt VFIO GPU passthrough guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/guides/kubevirt-vfio-gpu-passthrough/).

Reviewer 3: Just flagging same 404 link as earlier

```bash
helm install dra-driver-nvidia-gpu oci://registry.k8s.io/dra-driver-nvidia/charts/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --version 0.4.0 \
  --namespace dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --create-namespace \
  --set gpuResourcesEnabledOverride=true \
  --set nvidiaDriverRoot=/ \
  --set resources.computeDomains.enabled=false \
  --set featureGates.PassthroughSupport=true \
  --set featureGates.DeviceMetadata=true
```

Set `nvidiaDriverRoot` based on how the NVIDIA driver is installed on your nodes:

- `/` — Host-installed driver
- `/run/nvidia/driver` — GPU Operator-managed driver
- `/home/kubernetes/bin/nvidia` — GKE-managed driver

> The above helm command enables `PassthroughSupport` and `DeviceMetadata` during installation of DRA Driver for Nvidia GPUs. Other features left disabled unless your environment requires them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The above helm command enables `PassthroughSupport` and `DeviceMetadata` during installation of DRA Driver for Nvidia GPUs. Other features are left disabled unless your environment requires them.
```

After the driver is installed, confirm that it published `DeviceClass` and `ResourceSlice` objects for your GPUs. Use the published `deviceClassName` in step 2.

## Creating a ResourceClaimTemplate

Create a `ResourceClaimTemplate` that requests a GPU from the DRA driver. Replace `vfio.gpu.nvidia.com` with the `DeviceClass` name published by your driver.

> When using the DRA driver for NVIDIA GPUs for KubeVirt passthrough, include the opaque `VfioDeviceConfig` block below. The NVIDIA driver does not inject the VFIO API device by default. See the [VfioDeviceConfig](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/guides/kubevirt-vfio-gpu-passthrough/#vfiodeviceconfig-parameters) parameters in the driver guide for more details.

Reviewer 3: same link

# Assigning GPUs with DRA
Release:

> - v1.9.0: Beta

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**FEATURE STATE:** v1.9.0: Beta
```
I don't think we've landed on a consistent convention but this is more widely used (and more compact).

Author: Yes, updated.

KubeVirt can attach GPUs to virtual machines through Kubernetes [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/).
With DRA, a GPU is requested through the Kubernetes `ResourceClaim` API, allocated by an external GPU DRA driver, and attached to the VM through `spec.resourceClaims` and `spec.domain.devices.gpus`.

This is an alternative to the device-plugin flow documented in [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md).
With DRA, you do not need to allowlist GPUs in `permittedHostDevices`. Instead, the DRA driver publishes `ResourceSlice` objects and KubeVirt reads device metadata from files mounted into virt-launcher.

`GPUsWithDRA` is enabled by default starting in v1.9.0. See [Activating feature gates](../cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates.md) to enable it on earlier releases or to disable it.

## Prerequisites

- **GPU DRA driver.** Install a compatible external GPU DRA driver in the cluster.

>     This guide documents the [NVIDIA k8s-dra-driver-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu) for production clusters. For development or testing without physical GPUs, see [Testing without physical GPUs](#testing-without-physical-gpus) in section 1.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This guide documents the [NVIDIA k8s-dra-driver-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu) for production clusters. 
```
As below I don't think that part of the doc is ready to be included yet.
Specifying that the k8s dra driver might be better served in the Overview section rather than here.

- **NVIDIA GPU Operator** — If deployed via Helm, its pods may run `nvidia-device-plugin` and `dcgm-exporter`. Disable or uninstall the operator on GPU nodes where you use DRA passthrough.
- **nvidia-persistenced** — Disabling this service is optional. The DRA driver can handle it automatically.
- **nvidia-dcgm/dcgm** — Disabling this service is optional when running driver v4.5.0 or later.

After the driver is installed, confirm that it published `DeviceClass` and `ResourceSlice` objects for your GPUs. Use the published `deviceClassName` in step 2.

### Testing without physical GPUs

TBD. If you do not have physical GPUs available, you can try this workflow with the [dra-example-driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver) `vfio-gpu` profile. This profile is separate from the driver's simulated `gpu` profile for containers and is intended for KubeVirt PCI passthrough via DRA. It discovers devices already bound to `vfio-pci` and publishes the `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` device attribute that KubeVirt expects.

It is being added in [kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver#218](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/pull/218) (not yet merged).

> ## 2. Create a ResourceClaimTemplate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Creating a ResourceClaimTemplate
```

      config:
      - requests:
        - dra-gpu
        opaque:
          driver: gpu.nvidia.com
          parameters:
            apiVersion: resource.nvidia.com/v1beta1
            kind: VfioDeviceConfig
            iommu:
              backendPolicy: LegacyOnly
              enableAPIDevice: true
      requests:
      - name: dra-gpu
        exactly:
          allocationMode: ExactCount
          count: 1
          deviceClassName: vfio.gpu.nvidia.com
```

#### VfioDeviceConfig parameters

The opaque `VfioDeviceConfig` block tells the NVIDIA DRA driver which VFIO device nodes to mount into virt-launcher through CDI.

**`enableAPIDevice: true`** — Mounts the VFIO control device `/dev/vfio/vfio` into the virt-launcher pod. KubeVirt **requires** this device to manage VFIO PCI assignments through libvirt.

**`backendPolicy: LegacyOnly`** — Selects the legacy IOMMU VFIO backend (`/dev/vfio/<iommu-group>`). The alternative, `PreferIommuFD`, uses the IOMMUFD backend (`/dev/iommu` and `/dev/vfio/devices/vfio*`) when available on the host. KubeVirt does not support IOMMUFD yet, so use `LegacyOnly` today. When KubeVirt adds IOMMUFD support, you can switch to `PreferIommuFD`.

> ## 3. Create a VMI with a DRA GPU

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Creating a VMI with a DRA GPU
```

# GPU assignment with DRA 

Release:

- v1.9.0: Beta

KubeVirt can attach GPUs to virtual machines through Kubernetes [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/).
With DRA, a GPU is requested through the Kubernetes `ResourceClaim` API, allocated by an external GPU DRA driver, and attached to the VM through `spec.resourceClaims` and `spec.domain.devices.hostDevices`.

This is an alternative to the device-plugin flow documented in [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md).
With DRA, you do not need to allowlist GPUs in `permittedHostDevices`. Instead, the DRA driver publishes `ResourceSlice` objects and KubeVirt reads device metadata from files mounted into virt-launcher.

## Prerequisites

- **GPU DRA driver.** Install a compatible external GPU DRA driver in the cluster.

  The steps below use the [dra-driver-nvidia-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu).

> - **Kubernetes v1.36 or later.** Required for DRA device metadata support ([KEP-5304](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/5304-dra-attributes-downward-api)). The core DRA APIs are available from Kubernetes v1.34, but KubeVirt depends on the metadata files introduced in v1.36.

Reviewer: This is incorrect, there is no dependencies on the kubernetes version. The Driver should have support for KEP-5304 and that the only dependency.

Reviewer 2: Yes v1.34+ is the only dependency. Device metadata feature is implicit for the DRA driver for NVIDIA GPUs (v0.4.0+) and only requires the feature gate `DeviceMetadata` alongside `PassthroughSupport` to be enabled

Author: Yes, have removed it.

> - **CDI-enabled container runtime.** DRA device metadata is mounted into virt-launcher through Container Device Interface (CDI). Ensure CDI is enabled in your container runtime.

Reviewer: CDI is dependency of DRA so this should already be documented in the DRA driver or DRA Kubernetes feature website. Please add that and link it here

```
The DRA Driver requires Container Device Interface (CDI) to be enabled in the underlying container runtime (such as containerd or CRI-O) and NVIDIA Driver version 580 or later. These are both default in GPU Operator v25.10.0 and later.
```
https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/gpu-operator/latest/dra-intro-install.html

> - **Host preparation for passthrough GPUs.** For passthrough allocations, GPU nodes must meet the usual PCI passthrough requirements (IOMMU enabled, `vfio-pci` available). See [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md#host-preparation-for-pci-passthrough).

Reviewer: @varunrsekar can you confirm if this is still required with the dra driver?

Reviewer 2: Yes this is generic VM requirement: 
1. IOMMU enabled in the kernel
2. vfio-pci (or variant) available in the node

The DRA driver has the same requirement for configuring passthrough

Reviewer: does the dra driver have docs that we can link here?

Author: Linked the doc over here - https://github.com/kubevirt/user-guide/pull/1008/changes#diff-319b8472b9d7eaf7c8f721a80167f83c48bfcff072e73161970cf8acb7c3a246R44

## Overview

The high-level workflow is:

1. Install a GPU DRA driver on the cluster.

> 2. Enable the required KubeVirt feature gates.

Reviewer: With beta it will already be enabled?

Author: Yes, updated the doc.

3. Create a `ResourceClaimTemplate` that requests a GPU from the driver.
4. Create a VMI that references the claim and maps it to `spec.domain.devices.hostDevices`.

## 1. Install the DRA GPU driver

Install a GPU DRA driver that supports KubeVirt device metadata.

The example below uses the [dra-driver-nvidia-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu). For installation details, see the [driver installation guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/install/).

```bash
helm install dra-driver-nvidia-gpu oci://registry.k8s.io/dra-driver-nvidia/charts/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --version 0.4.0 \
  --namespace dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --create-namespace \
  --set gpuResourcesEnabledOverride=true \
  --set nvidiaDriverRoot=/run/nvidia/driver \
  --set featureGates.PassthroughSupport=true \
  --set featureGates.DeviceMetadata=true

> ```

Reviewer 2: Can you also add `--set resources.computeDomains.enabled=false` here? We don't need this to be installed by default.

Set `nvidiaDriverRoot` based on how the NVIDIA driver is installed on your nodes:

- `/run/nvidia/driver` — GPU Operator-managed driver
- `/home/kubernetes/bin/nvidia` — GKE-managed driver
- `/` — Host-installed driver

> Enable `PassthroughSupport` and `DeviceMetadata` feature gates. Leave other driver feature gates disabled unless your environment requires them.

Reviewer: This needs to be reworded. 
```
The above helm command enables `PassthroughSupport` and `DeviceMetadata` during installation of DRA Driver for Nvidia GPUs. Other features left disabled unless your environment requires them.
```

> ### Testing without physical GPUs

Reviewer: This section is breaking the flow of the document, move this to the end?

IMO having the user-guide to install the nvidia gpu-dra driver first and then making it work without actual GPUs would be the right flow.

> If you do not have physical GPUs available, you can try this workflow with the [dra-example-driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver) `vfio-gpu` profile. This profile is separate from the driver's simulated `gpu` profile for containers and is intended for KubeVirt PCI passthrough via DRA. It discovers devices already bound to `vfio-pci` and publishes the `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` metadata that KubeVirt expects.

Reviewer 2: nit: s/metadata/device attribute

```suggestion
If you do not have physical GPUs available, you can try this workflow with the [dra-example-driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver) `vfio-gpu` profile. This profile is separate from the driver's simulated `gpu` profile for containers and is intended for KubeVirt PCI passthrough via DRA. It discovers devices already bound to `vfio-pci` and publishes the `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` device attribute that KubeVirt expects.
```

> This profile is being added in [kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver#218](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/pull/218). Until that change merges, use the PR branch and follow the `demo/clusters/kind/` instructions in that branch. The demo uses synthetic PCI devices from the [kubevirtci kind-1.35-vfio-gpu provider](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirtci/pull/1726) and installs the driver with `deviceProfile=vfio-gpu` and `kubeletPlugin.enableDeviceMetadata=true`. Use `deviceClassName: vfio-gpu.example.com` in your `ResourceClaimTemplate`.

Reviewer 2: I'm not a fan of user guides mentioning unmerged work. Lets make this section a TBD until the PR merges and open a follow-up to complete this. Otherwise, this should be written assuming that PR is going to merge - We can always hold this PR until the example driver PR merges.

Author: Removed the dra-example-driver content, will add it in a follow-up PR after it merged.

> 

Reviewer: Please add a blurb here about how the demo driver installs the fake pci kernel module. Just so users get a hint to look for right host environment.

Author: Added at the end.

  sudo systemctl disable <display-manager-name>
  ```
- **vectorAdd** — A sample CUDA application; stop the process if it is running.
- **nvidia-device-plugin** — Disable or uninstall the legacy NVIDIA device plugin.
- **dcgm-exporter** — Disable or uninstall DCGM exporter.
- **NVIDIA GPU Operator** — If deployed via Helm, its pods may run `nvidia-device-plugin` and `dcgm-exporter`. Disable or uninstall the operator on GPU nodes where you use DRA passthrough.
- **nvidia-persistenced** — Disabling this service is optional. The DRA driver can handle it automatically.
- **nvidia-dcgm/dcgm** — Disabling this service is optional when running driver v4.5.0 or later.

After the driver is installed, confirm that it published `DeviceClass` and `ResourceSlice` objects for your GPUs. Use the published `deviceClassName` in the next step.

## 2. Enable the KubeVirt feature gates

Enable the `GPUsWithDRA`, `HostDevicesWithDRA` and `HostDevices` feature gates in the KubeVirt CR:

```yaml
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: KubeVirt
metadata:
  name: kubevirt
  namespace: kubevirt
spec:
  configuration:
    developerConfiguration:
      featureGates:
      - GPUsWithDRA
      - HostDevicesWithDRA

>       - HostDevices

Reviewer: The HostDevices feature is not strictly needed?

```

See [Activating feature gates](../cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates.md) for more details.

## 3. Create a ResourceClaimTemplate

Create a `ResourceClaimTemplate` that requests a GPU from the DRA driver.
Replace `vfio.gpu.nvidia.com` with the `DeviceClass` name published by your driver.

> When using the NVIDIA DRA driver for KubeVirt passthrough, include the opaque `VfioDeviceConfig` block below. The NVIDIA driver does not inject the VFIO API device by default.

Reviewer 2: nit: s/NVIDIA DRA driver/DRA driver for NVIDIA GPUs

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: dra-gpu-claim-template
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      config:
      - requests:
        - dra-gpu
        opaque:
          driver: gpu.nvidia.com
          parameters:
            apiVersion: resource.nvidia.com/v1beta1
            kind: VfioDeviceConfig
            iommu:
              backendPolicy: LegacyOnly
              enableAPIDevice: true
      requests:
      - name: dra-gpu
        exactly:
          allocationMode: ExactCount
          count: 1
          deviceClassName: vfio.gpu.nvidia.com
```

### VfioDeviceConfig parameters

The opaque `VfioDeviceConfig` block tells the NVIDIA DRA driver which VFIO device nodes to mount into virt-launcher through CDI.

> **`enableAPIDevice: true`** — Mounts the VFIO control device `/dev/vfio/vfio` into the virt-launcher pod. KubeVirt needs this device to open and manage VFIO PCI assignments through libvirt. Without it, the pod may receive only the IOMMU group device (`/dev/vfio/<iommu-group>`), which is not enough and VFIO PCI passthrough fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**`enableAPIDevice: true`** — Mounts the VFIO control device `/dev/vfio/vfio` into the virt-launcher pod. KubeVirt **requires** this device to manage VFIO PCI assignments through libvirt.
```

> **`backendPolicy: LegacyOnly`** — Selects the legacy IOMMU VFIO backend (`/dev/vfio/<iommu-group>`). The alternative, `PreferIommuFD`, uses the IOMMUFD backend (`/dev/iommu` and `/dev/vfio/devices/vfio*`) when available on the host. KubeVirt does not support IOMMUFD yet, so use `LegacyOnly` today. When KubeVirt adds IOMMUFD support, you can switch to `PreferIommuFD`.

Reviewer 2: @alaypatel07 Kubevirt IOMMUFD support is slated for v1.9 right? Does the text here need to reflect that? Basically, when the `IOMMUFD` feature-gate is enabled in kubevirt we can switch this policy to `PreferIommuFD`

For the [dra-example-driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver) `vfio-gpu` profile, omit the `config` block and use `deviceClassName: vfio-gpu.example.com`.

## 4. Create a VMI with a DRA GPU

Reference the claim template in `spec.resourceClaims`, then map the allocated GPU to `spec.domain.devices.hostDevices` using `claimName` and `requestName`.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vm-dra-gpu
  labels:
    app: vm-dra-gpu-test
spec:
  resourceClaims:
  - name: dra-gpu-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: dra-gpu-claim-template
  domain:
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 128Mi
    cpu:
      cores: 1
    devices:
      disks:
      - name: containerdisk
        disk:
          bus: virtio
      interfaces:
      - name: default
        masquerade: {}

>       hostDevices:

Reviewer: we expect the GPU to be in GPU section, not in hostDevices

      - name: gpu0
        claimName: dra-gpu-claim
        requestName: dra-gpu
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  volumes:
  - name: containerdisk
    containerDisk:
      image: quay.io/kubevirt/cirros-container-disk-demo:latest
```

These fields must reference each other:

- `spec.resourceClaims[].resourceClaimTemplateName` must match the `metadata.name` of the `ResourceClaimTemplate` created in step 3 (`dra-gpu-claim-template` in this example).

> - `spec.domain.devices.hostDevices[].claimName` must match `spec.resourceClaims[].name` for the claim that backs the device (`dra-gpu-claim` in this example).

Reviewer: `spec.domain.devices.gpus[].claimName`

# Assigning GPUs with DRA
Release:

- v1.9.0: Beta (target; `GPUsWithDRA` is still Alpha until [kubevirt/kubevirt#17514](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17514) lands)

KubeVirt can attach GPUs to virtual machines through Kubernetes [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/).
With DRA, a GPU is requested through the Kubernetes `ResourceClaim` API, allocated by an external GPU DRA driver, and attached to the VM through `spec.resourceClaims` and `spec.domain.devices.gpus`.

This is an alternative to the device-plugin flow documented in [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md).
With DRA, you do not need to allowlist GPUs in `permittedHostDevices`. Instead, the DRA driver publishes `ResourceSlice` objects and KubeVirt reads device metadata from files mounted into virt-launcher.

## Prerequisites

- **GPU DRA driver.** Install a compatible external GPU DRA driver in the cluster.

>   This guide documents the [NVIDIA k8s-dra-driver-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu) for production clusters. For development or testing without physical GPUs, see [Testing without physical GPUs](#testing-without-physical-gpus) in section 1.

Reviewer: This pre-requisite should include specifics about metadata. The DRA driver is only compatible if it publishes the metadata needed and supports passthrough/mdev device.

> - **CDI-enabled container runtime.** The DRA driver injects VFIO device nodes (`/dev/vfio/vfio` and `/dev/vfio/<iommu-group>`) into virt-launcher through Container Device Interface (CDI). Ensure CDI is enabled in your container runtime (containerd or CRI-O).

Reviewer: is this necessary here? will it not be captured in the driver docs?

  When using the NVIDIA DRA driver with GPU Operator, CDI is enabled by default in GPU Operator v25.10.0 and later. See the [GPU Operator DRA installation guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/gpu-operator/latest/dra-intro-install.html).

> - **DRA device metadata ([KEP-5304](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/5304-dra-attributes-downward-api)).** The driver must publish device attributes — for example `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` — in metadata JSON files that are mounted into virt-launcher. KubeVirt reads these files to build the libvirt domain XML for the GPU.

Reviewer: bundle this with requirement 1.

  This is separate from the VFIO device nodes above: CDI delivers the `/dev/vfio` handles used at runtime; the metadata file identifies which PCI device to attach. Enable device metadata in your driver (for NVIDIA, `featureGates.DeviceMetadata=true` in step 1).

> - **Host preparation for passthrough GPUs.** For passthrough allocations, GPU nodes must meet the usual PCI passthrough requirements (IOMMU enabled, `vfio-pci` available). See [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md#host-preparation-for-pci-passthrough).

Reviewer: This belongs to dar driver? cc @varunrsekar for thoughts

## 1. Install the DRA GPU driver

### DRA driver for NVIDIA GPUs

Install the [dra-driver-nvidia-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu). For installation details, see the [driver installation guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/install/).

```bash
helm install dra-driver-nvidia-gpu oci://registry.k8s.io/dra-driver-nvidia/charts/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --version 0.4.0 \
  --namespace dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --create-namespace \
  --set gpuResourcesEnabledOverride=true \
  --set nvidiaDriverRoot=/run/nvidia/driver \
  --set resources.computeDomains.enabled=false \
  --set featureGates.PassthroughSupport=true \
  --set featureGates.DeviceMetadata=true
```

Set `nvidiaDriverRoot` based on how the NVIDIA driver is installed on your nodes:

- `/run/nvidia/driver` — GPU Operator-managed driver
- `/home/kubernetes/bin/nvidia` — GKE-managed driver
- `/` — Host-installed driver

The above helm command enables `PassthroughSupport` and `DeviceMetadata` during installation of DRA Driver for Nvidia GPUs. Other features left disabled unless your environment requires them.

> #### Stop services and processes using NVIDIA GPUs

Reviewer: The content under this heading should directly reference the dra driver docs, too many driver specific details here that can be avoided.

```

Verify that no other process holds an open handle on GPU devices:

```bash
sudo lsof /dev/nvidia[^-]
```

This command should produce no output.

Common processes that block GPU passthrough include:

- **Xorg** — Identify and disable the display manager:
  ```bash
  sudo systemctl status display-manager
  sudo systemctl disable <display-manager-name>
  ```
- **vectorAdd** — A sample CUDA application; stop the process if it is running.
- **nvidia-device-plugin** — Disable or uninstall the legacy NVIDIA device plugin.
- **dcgm-exporter** — Disable or uninstall DCGM exporter.
- **NVIDIA GPU Operator** — If deployed via Helm, its pods may run `nvidia-device-plugin` and `dcgm-exporter`. Disable or uninstall the operator on GPU nodes where you use DRA passthrough.
- **nvidia-persistenced** — Disabling this service is optional. The DRA driver can handle it automatically.
- **nvidia-dcgm/dcgm** — Disabling this service is optional when running driver v4.5.0 or later.

After the driver is installed, confirm that it published `DeviceClass` and `ResourceSlice` objects for your GPUs. Use the published `deviceClassName` in step 3.

### Testing without physical GPUs

> TBD. If you do not have physical GPUs available, you can try this workflow with the [dra-example-driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver) `vfio-gpu` profile. This profile is separate from the driver's simulated `gpu` profile for containers and is intended for KubeVirt PCI passthrough via DRA. It discovers devices already bound to `vfio-pci` and publishes the `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` device attribute that KubeVirt expects.

Reviewer: Just having TBD and link the open PR is fine for now? if it is okay with @varunrsekar

Reviewer 3: I don't see why it would be included now. Add it later when the PR is merged and it does not need a TBD.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @aburdenthehand . The only reason to include open PRs/issues etc if its going to stay that way for a long time. Otherwise we can always follow-up with updates when they're resolved

> # Add GPU and HostDevices DRA user guide

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# GPU and HostDevices Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)
```
?

Reviewer 3: I just read the comment that the HostDevices part of this might be separated? If that's the case let's drop it from the title.

Author: Updated it, hostdevices will be in separate page.

Release:

- v1.9.0: Beta

KubeVirt can attach GPUs to virtual machines through Kubernetes [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/).
With DRA, a GPU is requested through the Kubernetes `ResourceClaim` API, allocated by an external GPU DRA driver, and attached to the VM through `spec.resourceClaims` and `spec.domain.devices.gpus`.

This is an alternative to the device-plugin flow documented in [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md).
With DRA, you do not need to allowlist GPUs in `permittedHostDevices`. Instead, the DRA driver publishes `ResourceSlice` objects and KubeVirt reads device metadata from files mounted into virt-launcher.

## Prerequisites

- **GPU DRA driver.** Install a compatible external GPU DRA driver in the cluster.

  This guide documents the [NVIDIA k8s-dra-driver-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu) for production clusters. For development or testing without physical GPUs, see [dra-example-driver](#testing-without-physical-gpus).

> - **CDI-enabled container runtime.** DRA device metadata is mounted into virt-launcher through Container Device Interface (CDI). Ensure CDI is enabled in your container runtime (containerd or CRI-O).

Reviewer 3: In KubeVirt, CDI is more commonly referring to our Containerized Data Importer. I think we need to be quite careful with this term. Maybe we could put a note in the intro para to make it explicit that this doc will be using CDI to refer to Container Device Interface, and not Containerized Data Importer. And then we also keep the convention here of using the full term for first usage.

Author: Yeah, added a note at the begining.

  When using the NVIDIA DRA driver with GPU Operator, CDI and NVIDIA driver version 580 or later are enabled by default in GPU Operator v25.10.0 and later. See the [GPU Operator DRA installation guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/gpu-operator/latest/dra-intro-install.html).

- **Host preparation for passthrough GPUs.** For passthrough allocations, GPU nodes must meet the usual PCI passthrough requirements (IOMMU enabled, `vfio-pci` available). See [Host Devices Assignment](host-devices.md#host-preparation-for-pci-passthrough).

## Overview

The high-level workflow is:

1. Install a GPU DRA driver on the cluster.
2. Ensure the `GPUsWithDRA` feature gate is enabled (on by default in v1.9.0).
3. Create a `ResourceClaimTemplate` that requests a GPU from the driver.
4. Create a VMI that references the claim and maps it to `spec.domain.devices.gpus`.

> ## 1. Install the DRA GPU driver

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Installing the DRA GPU driver
```
If you look at the way [this builds](https://deploy-preview-1008--kubevirt-user-guide.netlify.app/compute/dra_gpu/#4-create-a-vmi-with-a-dra-gpu), the numbering in the headings here is making it difficult to use the side TOC. I would remove the numbers and let the heading levels do that job.

Install a GPU DRA driver that supports KubeVirt device metadata. The steps below cover two options:

- **[NVIDIA GPU DRA driver](#nvidia-gpu-dra-driver)** — for clusters with physical NVIDIA GPUs.
- **[dra-example-driver](#dra-example-driver-development-and-testing)** — for trying this workflow without physical GPUs and for learning what the host environment must provide.

After installation, confirm that the driver published `DeviceClass` and `ResourceSlice` objects. Use the published `deviceClassName` in step 3.

> ### NVIDIA GPU DRA driver

Reviewer: @varunrsekar and I discussed offline, this section probably belongs to the driver docs: https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/guides/

I wonder if we should create a doc PR there and link it here. @Sreeja1725 wdyt?

Author: Makes sense, will create a PR and link it here.

Install the [dra-driver-nvidia-gpu](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu). For installation details, see the [driver installation guide](https://dra-driver-nvidia-gpu.sigs.k8s.io/docs/install/).

```bash
helm install dra-driver-nvidia-gpu oci://registry.k8s.io/dra-driver-nvidia/charts/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --version 0.4.0 \
  --namespace dra-driver-nvidia-gpu \
  --create-namespace \
  --set gpuResourcesEnabledOverride=true \
  --set nvidiaDriverRoot=/run/nvidia/driver \
  --set featureGates.PassthroughSupport=true \
  --set featureGates.DeviceMetadata=true
```

Set `nvidiaDriverRoot` based on how the NVIDIA driver is installed on your nodes:

- `/run/nvidia/driver` — GPU Operator-managed driver
- `/home/kubernetes/bin/nvidia` — GKE-managed driver
- `/` — Host-installed driver

The above helm command enables `PassthroughSupport` and `DeviceMetadata` during installation of DRA Driver for Nvidia GPUs. Other features left disabled unless your environment requires them.

> ### Stop services and processes using NVIDIA GPUs

Reviewer: same as above: https://github.com/kubevirt/user-guide/pull/1008/changes#r3468261917

```

Verify that no other process holds an open handle on GPU devices:

```bash
sudo lsof /dev/nvidia[^-]
```

This command should produce no output.

Common processes that block GPU passthrough include:

- **Xorg** — Identify and disable the display manager:
  ```bash
  sudo systemctl status display-manager
  sudo systemctl disable <display-manager-name>
  ```
- **vectorAdd** — A sample CUDA application; stop the process if it is running.
- **nvidia-device-plugin** — Disable or uninstall the legacy NVIDIA device plugin.
- **dcgm-exporter** — Disable or uninstall DCGM exporter.
- **NVIDIA GPU Operator** — If deployed via Helm, its pods may run `nvidia-device-plugin` and `dcgm-exporter`. Disable or uninstall the operator on GPU nodes where you use DRA passthrough.
- **nvidia-persistenced** — Disabling this service is optional. The DRA driver can handle it automatically.
- **nvidia-dcgm/dcgm** — Disabling this service is optional when running driver v4.5.0 or later.

After the driver is installed, confirm that it published `DeviceClass` and `ResourceSlice` objects for your GPUs. Use the published `deviceClassName` in the next step.

> ## 2. KubeVirt feature gate

Reviewer: There is already a kubevirt feature gate doc, just linking that should be sufficient IMO: https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates/

Author: Left the featuregates for now, will remove it in the follow up PR once the dra moved to beta.

      - GPUsWithDRA
```

If the gate was explicitly disabled, remove `GPUsWithDRA` from `disabledFeatureGates`. See [Activating feature gates](../cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates.md) for more details.

## 3. Create a ResourceClaimTemplate

Create a `ResourceClaimTemplate` that requests a GPU from the DRA driver.
Replace `vfio.gpu.nvidia.com` with the `DeviceClass` name published by your driver.

When using the NVIDIA DRA driver for KubeVirt passthrough, include the opaque `VfioDeviceConfig` block below. The NVIDIA driver does not inject the VFIO API device by default.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: dra-gpu-claim-template
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      config:
      - requests:
        - dra-gpu
        opaque:
          driver: gpu.nvidia.com
          parameters:
            apiVersion: resource.nvidia.com/v1beta1
            kind: VfioDeviceConfig
            iommu:
              backendPolicy: LegacyOnly
              enableAPIDevice: true
      requests:
      - name: dra-gpu
        exactly:
          allocationMode: ExactCount
          count: 1
          deviceClassName: vfio.gpu.nvidia.com
```

> #### VfioDeviceConfig parameters

Reviewer: another instance of a section which is apt for dra driver docs and cross link here?

Author: Yes, will remove all these driver related information once [these](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-driver-nvidia-gpu/pull/1218) changes go in.

For the [dra-example-driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver) `vfio-gpu` profile, omit the `config` block and use `deviceClassName: vfio-gpu.example.com`.

## 4. Create a VMI with a DRA GPU

Reference the claim template in `spec.resourceClaims`, then map the allocated GPU to `spec.domain.devices.gpus` using `claimName` and `requestName`.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vm-dra-gpu
  labels:
    app: vm-dra-gpu-test
spec:
  resourceClaims:
  - name: dra-gpu-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: dra-gpu-claim-template
  domain:
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 128Mi
    cpu:
      cores: 1
    devices:
      disks:
      - name: containerdisk
        disk:
          bus: virtio
      interfaces:
      - name: default
        masquerade: {}
      gpus:
      - name: gpu0
        claimName: dra-gpu-claim
        requestName: dra-gpu
  networks:
  - name: default
    pod: {}
  volumes:
  - name: containerdisk
    containerDisk:
      image: quay.io/kubevirt/cirros-container-disk-demo:latest
```

These fields must reference each other:

> - `spec.resourceClaims[].resourceClaimTemplateName` must match the `metadata.name` of the `ResourceClaimTemplate` created in step 3 (`dra-gpu-claim-template` in this example).

Reviewer: This is the crux of the documentation, we need this to get a lot of attention, other things can be cross linked.

Author: Added it as an imporant note.

When the VMI starts, virt-launcher reads GPU metadata from the DRA device metadata files and uses attributes such as `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` to generate the libvirt domain XML.

### Testing without physical GPUs

If you do not have physical GPUs available, you can try this workflow with the [dra-example-driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver) `vfio-gpu` profile. This profile is separate from the driver's simulated `gpu` profile for containers and is intended for KubeVirt PCI passthrough via DR

Unlike the driver's simulated `gpu` profile for containers, `vfio-gpu` targets KubeVirt PCI passthrough. The driver discovers PCI devices already bound to `vfio-pci`, publishes `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` in device metadata, and mounts `/dev/vfio` nodes into virt-launcher through CDI. That is the same host contract a production GPU node must satisfy: IOMMU enabled, devices unbound from vendor drivers, and bound to `vfio-pci` before allocation.

!!! note "Linux hosts only"
    The kind-based demo requires a Linux host with vfio-bound PCI devices. Real hardware bound to `vfio-pci` works the same way.

> #### Prepare the host

Reviewer: Should we create a separate section for the fake devices?

It will be helpful not just for dra but also device plugin testing.

Author: Yes, I will take it as a follow up and add to the docs once it gets merged?

Author: Yes, will add it after the PR got merged.
